---
draft: true
childof: research
url: "/us-eviction-filing-patterns-2021/ "
contenttype: updates
collection: true
contentcat: research
featured: true
in_index: true
title: "Preliminary Analysis: Eviction Filing Patterns in 2021"
date: 2022-03-08T15:28:51.756Z
postauthorname: Peter Hepburn, Olivia Jin, Joe Fish, Emily Lemmerman, & Anne Kat Alexander
postauthortitle: The Eviction Lab
authorpic: /images/bios/elab_thumb_sm.jpg
twImage: 11-months-cdc-social.png
fbImage: 11-months-cdc-social.png
---
Millions of renters avoided the threat of eviction in 2021 thanks to expanded legal protections and multiple new social safety net programs, many of them enacted as part of the American Rescue Plan. For the second year in a row, eviction filings remained well below normal, pre-pandemic levels.

This reduction in eviction filings varied between jurisdictions, over the course of the year, and depending on neighborhood demographics. Low-income and majority-Black neighborhoods, which normally see an outsize share of eviction cases, experienced the largest absolute reductions in filings. It’s becoming increasingly clear that public policies enacted in response to the pandemic have led to a sustained reduction in housing instability and were effective in helping those most in need.

Since the start of the COVID-19 pandemic, we have been [tracking eviction filings in a set of jurisdictions across the country](https://evictionlab.org/eviction-tracking/). While not a representative sample, the six states and 31 cities included in the Eviction Tracking System (ETS) are home to roughly a quarter of all renters nationwide. [Eviction filings fell sharply at the onset of the pandemic but increased in the later months of 2020](https://evictionlab.org/us-eviction-filing-patterns-2020/), though still ended the year lower than typical pre-pandemic levels. In this post, we update our previous research to analyze the second calendar year of the pandemic. 

We observed 434,304 eviction cases filed between January 1 and December 31, 2021 across all sites tracked by the ETS. We compare what we observed in 2021 to normal conditions: the number of cases filed in a typical year prior to the pandemic in the same set of states and cities. This allows us to provide an estimate of the number of “avoided” evictions—evictions that were never filed. In this case, that represents a conservative estimate because the financial effects of the pandemic put a greater number of families than normal at risk of eviction. That is, given economic hardship resulting from the pandemic, we would have expected far more eviction cases to be filed in 2021 than were filed in 2019. We observed the opposite.

In a typical year, roughly 865,000 eviction cases would be filed in the 31 cities and 6 states that make up the ETS. In 2021 we saw half that number: 434,304 eviction filings (50.3% of normal). Put another way, we observed nearly 430,000 fewer eviction cases than normal across the areas that we track. Using regression methods and historical data for the rest of the country, we can estimate that nationwide at least 1.36 million eviction cases were avoided in 2021. By comparison, we observed 416,913 eviction cases filed across the ETS sites in 2020 and estimate that at least 1.65 million filings were avoided that year.

Reductions in eviction filings were much larger in some places than in others. In Figure 1 we plot eviction filings in 2021 relative to normal levels for all cities in the ETS.

{{< scaleimg_page img="el-fig1.jpg" scale="145" title="Figure 1. Eviction filings in 2021 in ETS cities, relative to historical average" caption="" alt="bar chart" >}}

Over the course of 2021, eviction filings in New York City, Austin, TX, and Richmond, VA all remained below 25% of historical average. There were nearly 184,000 eviction cases avoided in 2021 in New York City alone. By contrast, there were over 1,500 more eviction cases filed in Las Vegas, NV than we would expect to see in a typical year. Filings in Cincinnati, OH, Tampa, FL, Gainesville, FL, and Columbus, OH were also above 75% of historical average.

As 2021 progressed, eviction filings increased relative to typical monthly levels, a pattern that suggests a return to the pre-pandemic status quo. In Figure 2 we plot the number of eviction cases filed across all sites in each month as a share of historical average. In January and February, we saw about 40% of the caseload we would expect each month, based on the same months in prior years. Filings spiked in March, but otherwise remained below 50% of historical average through the end of the summer. On August 26, the Supreme Court struck down the CDC’s eviction moratorium, which had been in place since the previous September. [Filings increased in the subsequent months](https://evictionlab.org/updates/research/eviction-filing-trends-after-cdc-moratorium/), reaching a high of 64.6% of historical average in December.

{{< scaleimg_page img="el-fig2.jpg" scale="145" title="Figure 2. Eviction filings across all ETS sites as a share of historical average, by month" caption="" alt="bar chart" >}}

Across all of our sites, reductions in eviction filings were more heavily concentrated in some neighborhoods than others. Using data from the Census Bureau, we categorized every neighborhood from which we collect data by its racial/ethnic majority (Black, Latino, white, or other/none). In Figure 3, we plot overall reductions in eviction filings across these neighborhoods.

{{< scaleimg_page img="el-fig3.jpg" scale="145" title="Figure 3. Absolute reduction in eviction case filings, by neighborhood racial/ethnic majority" caption="" alt="bar chart" >}}

All told, we observed just over 120,000 fewer eviction filings than normal in majority-Black neighborhoods. In other words, over a quarter (27.9%) of all avoided eviction cases in 2021 were in majority-Black neighborhoods. That’s particularly striking given that only about one in ten neighborhoods in which we collect data are classified as majority-Black (11.6%). We saw nearly 105,000 fewer eviction cases filed in 2021 in majority-Latino neighborhoods, almost 110,000 fewer in neighborhoods with no racial/ethnic majority, and 95,000 fewer in majority-white neighborhoods.

In Figure 4 we conduct a similar analysis, but looking at neighborhood median income. We find that the largest reductions in eviction filings were in neighborhoods where residents were poorest: over 240,000 fewer eviction cases than normal were filed in 2021 in neighborhoods with median income below $50,000. Just over a third of all ETS neighborhoods fall in this category (35.9%), but they accounted for the clear majority of all avoided evictions (57%).

{{< scaleimg_page img="el-fig4.jpg" scale="145" title="Figure 4. Absolute reduction in eviction case filings, by neighborhood median income." caption="" alt="bar chart" >}}

These findings indicate that the most disadvantaged neighborhoods experienced the most significant gains in 2021 in terms of rental housing stability. This was not a given: often people with more education, connections, and resources are better able to take advantage of social policy improvements. If that would have been the case here, we would have seen a more pronounced effect in reducing eviction filings in middle-income or majority-white areas. Instead, the largest reductions happened in the poorest neighborhoods.

Among the eviction cases that were filed, women of color were disproportionately affected. While demographic characteristics of tenants aren’t captured in eviction filings, we were able to use statistical techniques to predict the race/ethnicity and gender of the defendants facing eviction on the basis of available evidence. Of all defendants for whom we could predict gender, a slight majority were women (52.0%). Roughly one third (33.2%) of filings were against Black defendants, 17.0% against Latino defendants, and 44.0% against white defendants. [As was true prior to the pandemic](https://evictionlab.org/demographics-of-eviction/), Black renters—who account for only 22.0% of all renters in the areas we track—received an outsize share of eviction filings in 2021 (see Figure 5).

{{< scaleimg_page img="el-fig5.jpg" scale="145" title="Figure 5. Share of listed eviction filing defendants and renters, by race/ethnicity" caption="" alt="bar chart" >}}

Pandemic-related economic hardships, [which were felt most acutely by renter households and those already most likely to face eviction](https://ternercenter.berkeley.edu/research-and-policy/estimating-covid-19s-near-term-impact-on-renters/), put [millions of families at risk of losing their homes](https://www.urban.org/sites/default/files/publication/104762/the-race-to-save-millions-from-eviction.pdf). How is it, then, that we ended 2021 with half as many eviction filings as normal? Four policy factors stand out as the most plausible explanations.

First, the [Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s eviction moratorium](https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-2020-09-04/pdf/2020-19654.pdf) was in place for the first eight months of the year. The order offered protection to nearly all renter households if they filed a declaration form, and in [previous analyses](https://evictionlab.org/eleven-months-cdc/) we estimated that at least 1.55 million fewer eviction cases than normal were filed across the U.S. while it was in force. As noted above, case filings increased after the Supreme Court struck the order down, which is suggestive of the protective effect that it had. Indeed, 40.4% of the year’s cases were filed in the third of the year after the order was rescinded (September - December).

Second, many renters were protected by state and local eviction moratoria for some or all of 2021. In the early weeks of the pandemic, 43 states and the District of Columbia established some form of eviction moratorium. Many of these orders expired or were repealed by the end of the summer of 2020, but 16 states and the District of Columbia—home to over 19 million renter households (44.8% of all renter households nationwide)—still had a moratorium in place at the start of 2021. This set of states dwindled over the course of the year. At the end of 2021, only New Jersey, New Mexico, New York, and Washington, D.C. still had eviction moratoria in place.

Third, 2021 saw an unprecedented distribution of emergency rental assistance (ERA). Between the Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2021 and the American Rescue Plan, Congress allocated $46.5 billion in ERA funding. This money began to reach renters and landlords as early as February 2021, and programs sped up distributing funds as the year went on. According to the most recent data from the Treasury Department, nearly $19 billion dollars was paid out to over 3.8 million unique households in 2021. Put another way, one in seven low-income renter households in the U.S. received rental assistance in 2021. [Data from the Treasury Department indicate that these funds were effectively targeted to those most in need of assistance](https://home.treasury.gov/news/press-releases/jy0606): Black and Latino tenants, women, and extremely low-income renters. Given that more households received ERA payments over the course of 2021 (3.8 million) than we would expect to receive an eviction filing in a typical year ([3.7 million](https://www.congress.gov/116/meeting/house/110362/witnesses/HHRG-116-BA00-Wstate-DesmondM-20200114.pdf)), it is hard to imagine a scenario in which this program did not lead to a meaningful reduction in eviction filing rates.

Fourth, a number of additional policies not specifically targeted to renters may have contributed to housing stability. Until early September, unemployed people could access expanded benefits including an extra $200 or $600 and more weeks of benefits. The American Rescue Plan sent a third round of stimulus payments, this time $1,400, to most Americans. And from July onwards—also as a function of the American Rescue Plan—the IRS mailed Child Tax Credit payments to millions of households, [lifting many out of poverty](https://www.povertycenter.columbia.edu/news-internal/monthly-poverty-december-2021). All three of these policies provided cash to families and may have helped to keep rent paid.

In Figure 6, we plot these policies over the course of the year. We track the number of renter households that were protected each month by state eviction moratoria and the cumulative number of households that received ERA payments. We also mark out the months in which the CDC eviction moratorium was in place, when the American Rescue Plan stimulus checks were delivered, when expanded unemployment benefits were available, and when Child Tax Credit payments were sent.

Determining exactly which policies were most effective at driving down eviction filing rates is challenging. The overlapping nature of these supports makes causal inference difficult, but not impossible. This will be a critical area for future research to ensure that policymakers know what works best when crafting policies to keep eviction filings low and increase housing stability.

Despite the severe economic repercussions of the COVID-19 pandemic, we estimate that over three million eviction cases have been avoided nationwide between March 15, 2020 and the end of 2021. These reductions have been most pronounced in neighborhoods that normally are ground zero for the eviction crisis: majority-Black and low-income areas. It’s impossible to fully evaluate the benefits of these avoided evictions—in terms of individual, family, and community health, stability, and well-being. At a minimum, though, this reduction in filings stands as evidence that the pre-existing status quo, in which 3.7 million eviction cases were filed nationwide each year, need not be taken for granted. Sustained interventions can and have dramatically reduced the level of housing instability in this country, and there’s no reason to go back to normal.