---
abbrev: ebenfer
position: Visiting Research Collaborator
date: 2017-11-26T03:46:25.603Z
childof: research-team-bios
title: Emily A. Benfer
image: /images/bios/ebenfer_full.jpg
thumb: /images/bios/ebenfer_thumb.jpg
weight: 35
---
Emily A. Benfer is an associate professor of clinical law (tenured) at George Washington University Law School. She first collaborated with the Eviction Lab in March 2020 to create the COVID-19 Housing Policy Scorecard. As a research collaborator with the Lab, she conducts legal mapping and policy surveillance of U.S. eviction and housing policy, including eviction moratoria, rental assistance, and right to counsel. Her clinic practice and research focus on the intersection of social determinants of health, racial inequity, and poverty with an emphasis on housing and eviction policies. Emily has widely published, testified before Congress, and appeared in numerous media outlets on these topics. Her research has been cited by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and in multiple federal bills and court orders. Emily’s volunteer activities have included serving as the appointed Chair of the American Bar Association’s Task Force on Eviction, Housing Stability, and Equity, a member of the Legal Services Corporation U.S. Eviction Law Study Advisory Board, a policy advisor to the National Center for Medical-Legal Partnership, and a volunteer for the Homeless Children’s Playtime Project. Emily also served as an Equal Justice Works Fellow and a Peace Corps volunteer. She has received numerous commendations for her efforts to advance health equity and housing justice, including the American Public Health Association David P. Rall Award for Advocacy and an American Bar Association Presidential Commendation. She was named one of Chicago’s Top 40 Lawyers Under 40 by the National Law Journal and recognized with the National Center for Medical-Legal Partnership Outstanding MLP Award and the Clinical Legal Education Award for the best case or project in the United States.